# Lab Report: Book Binding

#### Sara South

## Process Description

In this lab, we bound the Twitter bot poems into books that we had printed earlier on in the semester. After taking three sheets of paper, one of which was the title page, and the other two were the pages with the poems, we used a bone folder to fold the three pages together, and then nest them together. Then, a book cradle was used to hold the pages as I punched holes into the 8.5 x 11" paper. The holes were punched at 1.25", 2.75", 4.25", 5.75", and 7.25", which was measured using a ruler. Then, I cut thread that is 2 1/2 times the height of the book, and then thread then gathered a needle to therefore bind the book. The order was as follows for threading: out of the 3rd hole, into the 4th hole, out of the 5th hole, into the 4th hole, out of the 2nd hole, into the 1st hole, out of the 2nd hole, and back into the 3rd hole, where the thread was then double knotted, and then cut.

## Observations

Throughout this lab, I actually found the majority of the lab, for the first time, quite simple to follow. However, threading the pages proved to be a very difficult process. The order was confusing and proved to be quite meticulous, which I realizes is even more difficult when you have sweaty of clammy hands, like myself, as I did not want to ruin the ink.

Measuring the pages and folding the pages, however, proved to be quite simple, and therefore I was surprised at the sheer simplicity of book binding. I'm sure it's much more difficult when binding books at a much larger scale, with hundreds of pages, but binding books like these, that are only a few pages long, proved to be quite simple after completing this lab.

## Analysis

As mentioned in Jane Austen's, Letters to her sister Cassandra, "Ladies who read those enormous great stupid thick quarto volumes which one always sees in the breakfast parlour there must be acquainted with everything in the world. I detest a quarto. Capt. Pasley's book is too good for their society. They will not understand a man who condenses his thoughts into an octavo." This indicates that there is more to gain out of a smaller volume of a book, and that in fact, a larger, more obtrusive book does not necessarily contain better content. This may have meant that at the time, books that were smaller may have held a larger value to intellectuals or writers, and were not meant to be a showpiece, such as quartos. This relates to the lab as we created a folio, which were known to withhold a large amount of value at this time, in comparison to a quarto, which were not thoroughly enjoyed for their content. 

As stated in Charles W. Chesnutt, Baxter’s Procustes, the Bodleain book club appreciated the beauties of a particular volume as a piece of bookmaking. In fact, the smaller the edition, "the greater the collector's eagerness to acquire a copy." This indicates that the beauty of the outside of a book was more important during this time, as this book club cared more about the exclusivity of the book rather than what they were actually collecting. In fact, the highest price ever brought by the club was a book that contained no content. The story is self-referential in that way, and touches on the relationship between structure and content, as we shouldn't judge a book by its cover. Furthermore, in relation to this lab, the format has intrinsic associations, and we make judgements based off of this. Formats are such as: folio, quartos, octavos are major formats that are still used in the book-binding industry today. Major formats that are seen in the bookstore now are: paperback (mass-market paperbacks, trade paperbacks), hardback, and boardbooks. This therefore indicates that there's an intellectual ranking of formats, and that the way a book is bound greatly indicates the respect that one has for a book. 

Lastly, in Leah Price's codex, What We Talk About When We Talk About Books, Price questions the very way we bind and read books since the Interleaf chapter is extremely difficult to read, as it's completely horizontal, and spanning two pages. This allows us to appreciate the conventions of the bookbinding structure that we use, and which makes books easier to read, indicating the significance of this lab.