# Lab Report: Illuminating The Text

#### Sara South

## Process Description

In this lab, we explored the various books that exist within the Special Archives Collection at Northeastern's Snell Library. We examined and analyzed the various intricacies of printed texts, such as the Red Dragon Book, Northeastern's only medieval manuscript. It was written using calligraphy, and did not have page numbers, as page numbers weren't implemented until after the 1400s, when prints were mass produced. We examined various geographical books, with intricate, engraved maps, and discussed why some books had pages that were still together, and had not been taken apart, indicating they had not been read. We also discussed the idea of subscribing to a book, therefore receiving money in advance before the book was published by showing samples of the work. We also discussed some of the more modern books from Northeastern's collection that question the ultimate definition of a book. One example was a book titled, "Boundless," with no way to open the book, hence the irony of the title. To be able to read the book, it would need to be destroyed. Another example, was a book that printed all armed conflict, from the year 0 AC, all the way to 2015. This lab tested the boundaries of what a book what really is, and allowed us to question the conventions of bookmaking in the past and the present. 

## Observations

I found it particularly fascinating that Northeastern has such a broad and unique book collection. I was particularly surprised by the sheer compactness of the Red Dragon Prayer Book, as the words were emaculately written, not typed, and it maintained its age very well. When observing the fact that some of the book's pages were still attached together, this allowed me to appreciate the intricacies of bookmaking. The pages were still bound together, indicating how the pages were made, and how they needed to be taken apart with a special tool to be able to be read. 

Another exciting aspect of this lab was examining the limitations of a book. Throughout this lab, I was constantly considering the conventions of a codex, such as: being bound by a cover, having a reasonable amount of text on the page, and listing a publisher or table of content at the front. However, this lab completely changed my definition of a codex. I questioned, is it really a book if it's purely images? Has a book been read if the pages are still bound together? Is a book really a book if you have to destroy it to read it? These sorts of questions kept popping up in my mind throughout the lab as we examined a variety of codices, manuscripts, texts, and even QR codes.

## Analysis

3 paragraphs

As mentioned in Viscomi's "Illuminated Painting," William Blake emulated ancient engravers. Blake attempted to produce new copies of illuminated books, which became "extremely labor intensive as each illuminated page was printed on one side of the leaf and elaborately colored, framed with lines, and often touched with gold leaf." In the early 1790s, these books were considered "limited editions." Although they did cut production costs, it was labor intensive. When relating this to our lab, it's evident that the intricate composition and details of these books can be appreciated when considering the labor intensive work that went into these illuminated texts. Although illuminated books were hard to make, they provided audiences with greater opportunities to read at the time. 

Although printing illuminated books became more difficult due to greater aristic attention, as also mentioned in Viscomi's reading, it required more space. Therefore, Blake had to thoroughly incorpate the tools and techniques of writing, drawing, and painting in a graphic medium, to fit onto a page. This emphasizes the hard amount of work that went into composing a page, let alone a codex during this time. The codices in the Special Archives Collection are therefore extremely valuable, as they provide insight into the conventions of bookmaking at this time.

As Borsuk mentioned in her chapter, "The Book As Idea" from The Book, "Engaging with a book as an idea brings its material form back into the conversation, in ways that can be productive, exciting, perplexing, and at times, problematic." This was essentially important to consider as we examined the conventions of a book. Rather than considering if the "Boundless" book is really a book, rather, what sorts of questions does it provoke, and what is its purpose? Both artists and writers have the ability to "integrate their formal means of their realization and production with their thematic or aesthetic issues." The codex in itself, in all of these instances, is a political tool. In relation to this lab, these codices serve a dual purpose. This lab offered a variety of formats that carry the name "book," and therefore this reminds us of the deep history of formal experimentation with material text, and how it's evolved over time. 

Lastly, as Carron mentions in The New Art of Making Books, in Borsuk's chapter, "a book is a series of spaces, a sequence of moments." Therefore, these books defy space and time, allowing us to feel and learn something from a time before us. 