# Lab Report: Letterpress II: Presswork

#### Sara South

## Process Description

In this lab, we began with the type we had set up last week. Once the type has been all arranged in reverse, the various poems were placed together with various spaces to therefore make sure it prints as a block. Once this was secured with letterpress quions, which are then used to lock the type into place, it was carried over to the printing machine, where we each took turns printing 7 copies of each page of poems. In the printing room, the ink is first placed on the type, where then a sheet of paper is placed where it will be printed. The wheel has to then be pushed to the forward, where the foot pedal will come up. To get a good rhythm, the foot pedal must be pressed 2-3 times as the wheel continues to spin to press the type onto the paper properly. Once complete, the first batch of print is complete, and can be left on the drying rack to dry, where the process is repeated until the desired amount of print is complete. 

## Observations

I found the process of securing the letterpress quions with the type to be particularly frustrating and slow as it takes a high level of concentration and perfection to make sure all of the pieces of type are secure and can be printed properly. However, I can assume that it must have been much easier (and much faster) at an actual printing press in the 19th century, as these printers spent everyday perfecting their technique, and creating templates to easily create new prints with a similar formatting.

Furthermore, this lab did give me a better sense of appreciation now for works that I see that have been printed using a letterpress. Although it's incredibly meticulous and stressful at times, (especially when there were small pieces of type that were not properly secured with the quoins), it became evident that it's much easier to print multiple pieces of paper with the same print work, as it can easily be repeated with the efficiency of the letterpress printing one piece of paper every 5-7 seconds. 


## Analysis

 
In Emily Faithfull's "Women Compositors," she states that "printing was seen as impossible as the female mind is not mechanical." It's evident that this statement indicates the sheer complexity of printing, and the fact that men, at the time, did not believe that women are capable of understanding these technical complexities. In our day, this may seem primitive and sexist, but I feel this still rings true today in the tech and computer science industry. Women were also perceived as unable to understand computers as Jennifer Light has highlighted in one of her articles I read in my media history class known as, "When Computers Were Women." The issue is not so much that men do not thing that women can understand computers, rather the issue has always been the idea that the wages of men will be reduced by the introduction of women into the business. This dreaded increase of competition in the labor market, is merely not true, as the increase of productive power has always brought in more industrialized wealth, and maybe, a small re-adjustment of wages. However, what they should have considered at the time is that by bringing women into the field, this would lessen the cost of production, as this has been true in every industry that women were first shunned from, and then eventually let in on. 


On another note, in Dinius' “‘Look!! Look!!! at This!!!!’: The Radical Typography of David Walker’s Appeal”, which discusses Walker's historically ambitious pamphlet, highlights the significance of typography. Depending on if we are writing a poem, a screenplay, novel, or even a text, there is set syntax and grammatical rules that apply. As Walker was writing this pamphlet, he broke all of these rules to create a striking interaction between the print and the oratory, a topic we had discussed in depth after reading Plato's and Socrates' dialogue 2 weeks earlier. As Dinius highlights, "Emphatic italics, capitalizations, punctuation, and pointing fingers
Typographic features help readers follow the pamphlet’s instructions to spread its word." It catches the reader's eye, and allows us to read with Walker's stylistic tone and unique verbal inflections. However, although this may seem odd to us to read and analyze now, Dinius makes it clear that in the "age of word processing, strings of exclamation points are not rare, as the typography intensifies emotions." It's evident that this subconciously allows us to read the visual text of the page itself, which essentially "collapsed the ostensible binaries of voice and print." The typography of letterpress printing is similar to how we text today, using exclamation points to demonstrate our excitement, and all caps to indicate when we are upset, ultimatly conveying the writer's tone and emotion in its purest sense.


Lastly, in Leah Price's chapter “The Real Life of Books”, scholars were questioning whether a printed book meant that it was great, merely because it was printed. However, being able to print a mass amount of books allowed for a greater spread of philosophical, political, and creative ideas within society. Books were no longer privatized. They could be borrowed, shared, and returned to someone else. This lab made it evident to me how the press completely changed how we write, and how books were spread within society. It allowed for a greater group of people to be educated within society due to the sheer convenience of being able to print millions of the same piece of paper in an instant. 