# Lab Report: Into The Archive

#### Sara South

## Process Description

In this lab, we visited the Massachusetts Historical Society, where we were given a tour of the archives and explored children's literature. We were shown how the archive works, and how we are able to request items to review and to research. While exploring various children's texts, we were asked to consider the various mediums within the archive. The texts that were selected from the archive included diary entries from Sarah Gooll Putnam, the original publishing of Little Women, and even Peter Pan and the Kensington Gardens, just to name a few. Throughout this lab, we were asked to examine these texts and to consider what society prioritized at the time, such as the gender roles that were emphasized in the 1800s, or the views of nativism and isolationism that existed in the US after World War I, for instance. 

## Observations

I was particularly excited by the sheer uniqueness of all of these texts that we examined. One of the texts that I found particularly interesting and surprising was Sara Bryant's I am an American: first lessons in citizenship. The chapter Tongue of Treason paticularly stood out to me due to the sheer propaganda that was emphasized and engrained into young children's minds in the 1870's. She states, "Something very dangerous to freedom can happen if all Americans do not speak and use English...some bad man from the old country comes and talks to [the foreigners] in a language they do understand. And he tells them false things. He tells them that America is selfish., that the rich rule, and that our democracy is a make-believe." This is extremely insightful as to how the US viewed Europe and other foreign countries in the 1870s. They are fearful that their democratic government will be questioned, and that they must emphasize that English is a superior language because it's spoken in America.

Another text that surprised me were the books titled "Well Bred Girl" and "Well Bred Boy" from the 1840s. This provided a massive amount of insight into the gender roles at the time. Women were meant to perfect needlework, while men, in contrast, were expected to engage in harsh physical labor. After completing this lab, I am definitely keen on returning to the Massachusetts Historical Society to examine even more texts from various time periods that provide insight into the nuances of New England history, culture, and perspectives.

## Analysis

As Ellen Cushman mentions in We’re Taking the Genius of Sequoyah into This Century’: The Cherokee Syllabary, Peoplehood, and Perseverance, "The very workings of Native languages represent all intellectual, social, and historical activities of meaning making. They encode worldviews through each utterance, story, and document." This reminded me of one particular document in the archive, that was written in a Native American language, attempting to convert Native Americans into Christians. Although this text was meant to strip the Native Americans of their culture, rather, this contributed to the tribe's continued existence in the future as it was a written document in this Native American language. It's significant that this document was preserved because it allowed for linguistic perserverance, which, ironically, prevented the threat of "language erosion and extinction that so many tribal languages face." Therefore, this allowed for the Native American language to continue to exist through the written text, therefore preserving their alphabet, and hence, their linguistic culture.

As Bonnie Mak mentions in Architectures of the Page, "The page has crucially influenced how ideas matter." The page is significant in creating a platform for the story. As we had done in this lab, "how a message has been transmitted in the codex might be investigated by palaeographers who study script and layout in manuscripts." One particular book in the archive, Peter Pan and the Kensington Gardens, had only one sentence per page, with intense, detailed, illuminated texts on the page next to it. This space made it easier for the children to read and comprehend the story sentence by sentence, and to therefore fully appreciate the side-by-side illustrations next to the text. As Mak mentions, "Blank space is crucial to the activity of reading, and especially silent reading, because it enhances the legibility and comprehensibility of the page. Without these saccadic pauses that allow the eye to skip quickly across a line of text, the process of reading can take more than twice as long." This is therefore especially relevant to children's literature, as they need saccadic pauses and blank space to allow them to focus and read at a reasonable pace. 

Lastly, as Mak mentions "Readers interpret text, space, and image as they are inclined, but the meanings that they formulate are predicated upon the materiality of each carefully designed page." For instance, in Sarah Gooll Putnam's diary, she fills the blank space with her doodles and drawings, which eventually results in her dedicating her life to becoming an artist, where her works are featured in the Massachusetts Historical Society. This particular diary is a conversation between the designer and the reader, a dynamic of intention and reception. Therefore, this lab indicated the power of the medium of an archived text, and provided insight not only into the various mediums themselves, but the ideas, priorities, and cultures of centuries long before us.

In terms of how the readings help us connect to what we did in class, it's clear that examining the construction of text and image on a page is studied by palaeographers, and is therefore being examined in the same way that we examined the books and journals at the Massachussetts Historical Society. This lab therefore complemented the readings, as it's clear that the significance of the page was examined quite meticulously by us as we observed how gender roles, societal traditions, and other cultural factors were shown through the architectures of the page. For instance, it's clear that images were used on the page in these children's books to convey or visualize a certain implicit message to children, especially in Sara Bryant's novel about Americans, and the propaganda that ensued by using nationalist images of the Statue of Liberty or the American Flag. It's clear that the composition of the page is therefore intentional, and is used to convey a particular message in a particular way, therefore indicating how the lab complements Bonnie Mak's argument.  