# Lab Report: Letterpress 1: Composition

#### Sara South

## Process Description

The task of this lab is to print a poem that our twitter bot had created. Type is typically made of an alloy of lead, alimony, and tin. When printing, the spacing between the lines is known as leading, which will help to keep the type firmly in place. After deciding on the leading, it's important to consider both the thicker and the thinner pieces of lead. The thicker leading is used for the outer blocks. After selecting an 18 pt. lead font with a significant amount of letter "e's," indicating I will be able to complete a proper poem, I was able to begin the composing. When composing, b's look like d's and p's looks like q's, therefore the letters had to be switched. When placing the letters into the compositor, it had to be held at a slight angle so the type doesn't move. It's necessary to compose the type from right to left, rather than left to right, known as reading order. Furthermore, starting a line with a quad will give the letters more space, and since we were working with poetry, which has fairly generous spacing in comparison to prose, this made sense. Quads don’t belong to any particular typeface, rather, they are shorter than the typeface. Moreover, spacers can be exchanged between the same size fonts to make sure the compositor is flushed. After setting up the type, it must be flushed on the compositor to 20 pt. so it can be evenly printed, and it needs to look like an even square block of metal. Anothr important piece to consider is that there must be a piece of lead between each line, otherwise the loose type will crumble. In addition, when centering a line, it's necessary to build out the spacers on either side so the type remains flushed. When finished, the type should appear as a mirror image for it to print properly. After the composing process is finished, the type is placed in galleys, which are metal trays, used for storing and proofing space when working in a printing shop. This is where the type is kept until it will be printed during the next session.


## Observations

After completing this lab, I found it particularly fascinating the meticulousness of composing text to print. When typing on a computer, or writing on a piece of paper, I never think twice about the spacing of my letters, I subconsciously evenly space out my letters, and I am able to switch to the next line without hestitation. Not to mention, I am able to type at a lightening fast speed, where it took me almost an hour to compose two sentences to print. However, I am curious to know how fast individuals would have worked in the printing shop. Clearly, as an amateur printer, it took me a bit longer than usual perhaps.


Furthermore, one particular frustrating aspect of printing was that I was struggling to make the type to appear flushed by finding the perfect equation and about of spacers. This is not something I have ever had to consider while writing or typing on a computer, as I can either manually switch to another line or press the return button. This indicated to me that composing print is an art that must be perfected for reliable and consistent results -- especially when mass printing books.


## Analysis

In Stephen Fry’s “The Machine That Made Us,” he states, “that it must be hard to imagine what life would have been like before printing.” However, in Borsuk’s previous chapter discussing “The Book as Object,” it’s clear that texts were still scribed in a variety of manners, such as manuscripts, scribes, etc. It's evident, when comparing these two texts, that printing had completely transformed society's ability to share texts and to communicate ideas in a profound way. 

In Amaranth Borsuk’s chapter from The Book, titled “The Book as Content,” she states “books were finally seen as a technological innovation.” This was clearly due to the fact that books were no longer privatized -- they could be printed and shared. Books were, however, a huge risk to print, and were a long-term investment as they took about 18 months to make. Pamphlets were easier to print, and were able to keep the shop running. After experiencing how print composing works myself, it's clear that's an extremely meticulous job, and is almost surgical in the manner in which the type must be composed before printing. 

Another important concept in relation to this lab, as mentioned by Johannes Trithemius in "In Praise of Scribes", is the connection between labor and value. Scribes used to lend strength to words, and religious devotion did not exist without writing. As Trithemius argues, scripture on parchment could persist a thousand years, whilst printed books would never equal scribed books. Printers could only work on individual projects, lending them inable to print at a large level. However, Trithemius' observations brought me to the question, were books more valuable during the printing age due to the fact that it took such a long time to make? Bookmaking, in my opinion, was and is an industrialized process that involves a lot of labor and people. Yet, this is completely necessary to spread ideas and schools of thoughts, provoke ideas, and spark imagination in an industrialized society. 